a rise in debt isn't an indication that
we're living beyond our means
because as phattest puts it one person's
debt is another person's asset or as I
equivalently put it debt is money we owe
to ourselves it would really take the
mask off this argument if he just gave
one example I'm gonna give you one
example right now that's very telling
who owns government bonds who owns this
debt Microsoft does Microsoft is a
company with one hundred and thirty
three billion dollars to spend and they
have put 84% of that money into
government bonds that's over 111 billion
u.s. dollars now although it is
hypothetically true that a poor person
might scrape their money together and
buy a government bond it's incredibly
unlikely poor people and even
middle-class people do not have money to
spare on government bonds and even
during World War two you may have a few
heartwarming examples of poor people who
managed to buy bonds managed to support
the war effort by a government debt and
make a few dollars back on their
investment nevertheless if you look at
the math disproportionately it is the
richest of the rich who will benefit
from the government offering debt having
debt held by your wealthy is only in the
future going to transfer that taxes that
burden in our future generations of
those poor and middle-income classes
paying that tax their taxes to finance
that debt that the wealthy owns to pay
it back for themselves so what's gonna
happen
they're gonna pay it they're not getting
anything back they're not getting
anything back with interest
but the problem is is that's gonna
transfer money away from these and
households these poor middle and ik
Americans up and then the problem
becomes much more crippling when you
talk about middle class people and poor
people who do not have the option to
profit from government debt the way
Microsoft is and you ask them why are
you paying taxes do you realize
so that the more and more the American
government is in debt the greater and
greater a percentage of your income is
going to make the rich richer and by the
same token it's making you poor although
it is true that in Western democracies
rich people pay the vast majority of
taxes in fact it seems incredible if you
look at a pie chart of united states tax
collection of the money the government
gathers from the population it's amazing
how much of it comes from the richest 1%
the richest 5% the richest 20% of the
country although that is true
nevertheless if you have ever been among
the working poor you know just how hard
it is to part with the few hundred
dollars the government is taking from
you in taxes I can remember working at
Starbucks and the money being taken out
of my paycheck to me that was a really
appreciate anew life after university
and so on
every few hundred dollars the government
took away from me really mattered I may
have had the comforting delusion that
the money being taken away from me as a
poor underemployed university student
working in Starbucks I may have had the
comforting delusion that the money being
taken away from me was to help people
even poorer than myself and that's a
very very powerful notion of social
responsibility that motivates the poor
in the middle class to pay their taxes
and it's very damaging to that sense of
I know the ethos of the taxpayer if we
can admit that the government's tax
dollars are in fact being used to make
the rich richer to make the richest
people and the wealthiest corporations
richer the blindingly obvious fact about
government debt as such the mechanism of
government raising money through the
selling of government bonds
is that it makes the rich richer and the
poor poorer and I'm gonna talk it
through with you in this video this is
not any kind of crazy conspiracy theory
it's a blindingly obvious fact of 21st
century economics that neither the
left-wing nor the right-wing are talking
about especially since the year 2008
we've become accustomed to a very
insincere dance in which the left-wing
is Pro debt and Pro deficit they're just
in favor of expanding I don't know
government spending whether to help the
poor or perhaps to invade Afghanistan a
military occupation of Iraq the other
things that costs billions and billions
of dollars taxpayers money but any case
the left-wing has generally taken up the
position of advocating for more debt for
more deficit spending whereas the
right-wing has expressed mmm
reservations about this although as you
all know in the United States the
Republican Party has lavished money on
projects such as the invasion of
Afghanistan lately they're talking about
spending a lot of money on building a
wall between the United States and
Mexico so when they want to spend money
the Republican Party are quizzically all
of a sudden in favor of debt and deficit
spending Paul Krugman is one of the
world's most influential people I think
I can say he's one of the world's most
powerful people he's an economist and he
is left-of-center I would not say he is
far left-wing but he's perhaps on the on
the left side of the Democrat Party in
the United States gonna quote Paul
Krugman here and this is in some ways a
completely typical left-of-centre
position especially since there's 2008
antonio fat has commenting on recent
work on deleveraging with the lack
thereof emphasizes one of my favorite
points no debt does not mean that we're
stealing from future generations
globally and for the most part even
within countries a rise in debt isn't an
indication that we're living beyond our
means
because as fattest puts it one person's
debt is another person's asset or as I
equivalently put it
debt is money we owe to ourselves so
that is dishonest in a profoundly
important way saying that debt consists
of money taken away from some people and
given to other people very much
intentionally obfuscates the mechanism
which has been clear since the invention
of government bonds government debt that
what it does is take money away from the
poor in the middle class and give it to
the richest people and we're just
corporations in our society we often
think about these debts as putting at
the backs of our children and our
children's children the way we're going
in our children's children's children
but it really matters of whose children
are paying these the step back so for
that seventy percent if we look back at
our previous wars World War one in World
War two that was mentioned we had these
bond campaigns so low and middle income
Americans can go down to the post office
as low as ten cents at a time and start
buying government debt and they're gonna
save that government debt until when
they're ready to cash it in so you today
own investment it's an investment
they're gonna get eventually that money
back just like many people do today who
can afford to do that so who can afford
to do that your wealthy Americans those
who are lucky to have retirement
accounts probably own aportfolio hold
some government debt having debt held by
your wealthy is only in the future going
to transfer that taxes that burden in
our future generations of those poor
middle-income classes paying that tax
their taxes to finance that debt that
the wealthy owns to pay it back for
themselves so what's gonna happen
they're gonna pay it they're not getting
anything back they're not getting
anything back with interest but the
problem is is that's gonna transfer
money away from these and households
these poor middle and ik Americans up
psychologically and culturally people
seem to think of buying government bonds
as a positive thing they think of it in
a positive way because of the experience
of World War two
the idea that the average man or even a
poor person could scrape some money
together and buy war bonds that they
could buy government debt that they
could lend to their money to the
government and that they could help the
government defeat the Nazis they could
help the United States defeat the
Germans that could help England defeat
the Germans and at the same time they
could make some sort of profit for
themselves that all society could become
war profiteers that's become a very
powerful propaganda notion that that
really shaped the transition in Western
democracies to governments being
massively reliant on debt and nobody
really questioning who gets rich and who
gets poor from this transaction as Paul
Krugman says here sleeting Lee after all
it's merely an interaction of one person
with another person one person's debt is
another person's asset yes indeed it
would really take the mask off this
argument if he just gave one example I'm
gonna give you one example right now
that's very telling who owns government
bonds who owns this debt Microsoft does
Microsoft is a company with one hundred
and thirty three billion dollars to
spend and they have put 84% of that
money into government bonds that's over
111 billion u.s. dollars now although it
is hypothetically true that a poor
person might scrape their money together
and buy a government bond it's
incredibly unlikely poor people and even
middle-class people do not have money to
spare on government bonds and even
during World War two you may have a few
heartwarming examples of poor people who
managed to buy bonds managed to support
the war effort by a government debt and
make a few dollars back on their
investment nevertheless if you look at
the math disproportionately it is the
richest of the rich
who will benefit from the government
offering debt offering to pay interest
on bonds partly of course because those
are the people who have the money to
spend partly for other economic and
cultural reasons now the one aspect of
this story that does get discussed in
economics and politics in 21st century
is what's called the crowding out effect
conservatives right-wingers and
libertarians will complain that there's
a profound problem throughout the
economy because Microsoft for example
out of their 133 billion dollars if they
are putting more than a hundred billion
of that into the government's hands if
they're taking that money and not using
it to innovate new computers they're not
using it to research how to make better
software or better hardware or something
they're not using it to research how to
put a man on the moon or a cure for
cancer they're taking over 100 billion
dollars that investors have given them
and investors have given them that money
with the hope that they will make more
computers make better computers that
that sort of thing and instead Microsoft
is profiting from taxpayers that's what
this is when they quote unquote
invest in US government and agency
securities when they buy government
bonds when they buy public debt what
they're doing is profiting from
taxpayers taxpayers will pay them money
by the government what the right-wing
conservatives and libertarians will
complain about is that this has a
dampening effect on innovation that this
in many ways robs capitalism of the main
mechanisms of its kind of strength
vitality and even transparency right if
you have bought stock in Microsoft
you've invested in Microsoft but in
reality what you're doing is indirectly
buying government savings bonds
what sense does the stock market make
what sense is the price or value of
Microsoft as a company make and yes if
you just take a moment to imagine
throughout the whole economy the fact
that there are corporations and
companies everywhere and indeed of
course banks themselves financial
institutions themselves investment firms
brokerages there are all kinds of
companies that instead of using their
money in ways that are truly productive
instead of using money that they have
invested in their in their company to
employ people instead they're giving
that money to the government so the
government can innovate Afghanistan so
the government can go into debt
operating hospitals all the things the
government does good and bad that does
indeed a road the conceptual and
pragmatic basis of what capitalism is
supposed to be and that complaint only
comes from the right-wing I have never
once heard anyone on the right-wing
neither a libertarian or conservative I
have never once heard any of them
complain that very fundamentally what
this mechanism is doing is taking money
away from the poor taking money away
from the middle class and giving it to
the richest people in our society it is
making the rich richer whether those are
individuals who are rich who decide to
buy government bonds government debt or
if it's a corporation like Microsoft
that's rich so that is very
fundamentally the mechanism of what
government debt is and even in the I
don't know morally uplifting context of
world war two propaganda that is in fact
what government debt always has been so
I say again it is true that the vast
majority of the tax money collected by
the government in the United States is
collected from wealthy people as a
larger and larger percentage of
America's budget is spent quote-unquote
paying down the debt or soon as I said
as more and more of the government
budget is spent paying for interest on
the debt that means that a larger and
larger
percentage of the taxes paid by the rich
are going to other rich people and
corporations that happen to own
government debt so yes that would be if
only rich people pay tax it would still
be very very difficult to justify what
I've just quoted from from Paul Krugman
it would be very difficult to say oh
well debt isn't bad it isn't a problem
because after all
one person's debt is another person's
asset if you were a multi-millionaire
paying a lot in taxes because the
wealthier you are the more you pay in
taxes morally why would you feel
positively about your tax dollars going
to make microsoft corporation richer to
some extent to make even foreign
investors the government of Japan the
government of China owned huge amounts
of use it to make them richer is that
what you pay taxes for and then the
problem becomes much more crippling when
you talk about middle class people and
poor people who do not have the option
to profit from government debt the way
Microsoft is and you ask them why are
you paying taxes do you realize that the
more and more the American government is
in debt the greater and greater a
percentage of your income is going to
make the rich richer and by the same
token it's making you poor the left-wing
in the United States has been in a
strangely hobbled position on this issue
the left-wing complains typically that
spending on the military is too high but
the reality is if you look at the
percentage of the American budget that's
spent in the military and the percentage
that's spent paying interest on the
government debt paying down the
government debt in the next few years
what we're gonna see is the military
budget shrinking and shrinking and the
percentage of the budget going to pay
for debt and deficit servicing expanding
and expanding at some point and it's not
too far in the future the percentage of
your tax payers dollars that will be in
this way making the rich richer paying
the interest on debt will exceed the
total budget for the military
this is not to say that the
conservatives of the right-wing or in a
coherent position on this issue it has
been completely bizarre that they've
advocated for reduced deficit spending
for better management the debt in all
cases except when they want to rattle
their sabers and go to war and then they
have an attitude that no amount of money
is too much to pay when it comes to
conquering Afghanistan a form of public
good we all find debatable and dubious
at best
[Music]